fork() - Program(P) creates a copy process
exec(program) - Program(P) starts a new program to replace iteself (replace P)

e.g. type ls in shell and press enter
  -> shell calls fork() to create copy of the shell
  -> new shell calls exec(ls)
  
A shell is a program that runs commands. It also serves as a small programming env.

All different Unix skells derive several of their features from the Bourne shell (/bin/sh),
a standard shell developed for early versions of Unix.
Every Unix system needs the Bourne shell in order to function correctly.

Linux uses an enhanced version of the Bourne shell called bash or the "Bourne-again" shell

The bash shell is the dafault shell on most Linux distributions,
and /bin/sh is normall a link to bash on a Linux system.

2.5.6 find and locate
locate file
locte searches an index that the system builds periodically.

2.8 Environment and Shell Variables
The shell can store TEMPORARY variables, called shell variables, containing the values of text strings.

To assign a value to a shell variable
STUFF=blah

An environment variable is like a shell variable, but it's not specific to the shell.
STUFF=blah
export STUFF
or
export STUFF=blah

ALL PROCESSES ON UNIX SYSTEMS HAVE ENVIRONMENT VARIABLE STORAGE.


The difference is that the environment variables are passed to programs that the shell runs,
whereas shell variables cannot be accessed in the commands that you run.

2.9 The Command Path
PATH is a special environment variable that contains the directories that the shell searches when trying to locate a command.
If programs with the same name appear in several directories in the path, the shell runs the first matching program.

2.10 Special Characters

2.14 Redirecting streams

ls /dummy > out.txt 2> err.txt
or
ls /dummy > out.txt 2>&1

To channel a file to a program's standard input, use <
head < /proc/cpuinfo
same as
head /proc/cpuinfo 
Most commands accept file names

$$ - shell variable that evaluates to the current shell's PID

Using Ctrl-c to terminate a process that is running in the current terminal
is the same as using kill with the INT (interrupt) signal

2.16.3 Job control
Shells support job control, which i a way to send TSTP and CONT signals to programs.
Ctrl-Z sends a TSTP signal to stop/suspend a process

to see list of stopped processes (STAT=T)
T    stopped, either by a job control signal or because it is being traced.
type jobs

To brigng it to foreground type fg
fg jobNumber (as seen in jobs)

If you want to run multiple shells, run each program in a separate terminl window,
put noninteractive processes in the background (bg),
or learn to use the screen program.

2.16.4 Background Processes
Normally, when you run a Unix command from the shell, you don't get the shell prompt back
until the program finishes executing.
However, you can detach a process from the shell and put it in the "background" with the (&)
which gives you the prompt back, e.g.

$ gunzip file.gz &

The shell should respond by printing the PID of the new background process, and the prompt should return immediately.

THE PROCESS WILL CONTINUE TO RUN AFTER YOU LOG OUT
?

The dark side of running background process is that they may expect to work with the standard input
(or worse, read directly from the terminal)
If a program tries to read something from the standard input when it's in the background, it can freeze or terminate

The best way to make sure that a background process does not bother you is to redirect its output and possibly input

If spurious output from background processes gets in your way redraw the content of your terminal window.

The bash shell support CTRL-L to redraw the entire sreen

If a program is reading from the standard input, CTRL-R usually redraws the current line

2.17 File MOdes and Permissions

Some executable files have an s in the user permissions listing instead of an x.
This indicates that the executable is setuid, meaning that when you execute the program,
it runs as though the file owner is the user instead of you.
Many programs use this setuid bit to run as root in order to get the privileges they need to change system files.
One example is the passwd program, which needs to change the /etc/passwd file.

2.17.1
You can list the contents of a directory if it's readable, but you can only access a file in a directory if the directory is exacutable.

You can specify a set of default permissions with the umask shell command, which applies a predefined set of permisssions to any new file you create.
In general, use umask 022 if you want everyone to be able to see all of the files and directories that you create,
and use umask 077 if you don't.

2.18.1 gzip
GNU ZIP is one of the current standard Unix compression programs
gunzip file.gz
gzip file

2.18.2 tar
gzip does not create archives of files; that is, it does not pack multiple files and directories into one file.
To create an archive, use tar instead:

tar cvf archive.tar file 1 file2 ...

.tar suffix is a convention, it isn't required
c flag activates create mode
v - verbose diagnostic
f - The f flag denotes the file option. The next argument after th f flag must be the file name for the archive.
You must use this option followed by a finename at all times, except with tape drives.
To use standard input or output, enter a dash(-) instead of the filename.

Unpacking tar files

tar xvf archive.tar
x - flag puts tar into extract/unpack mode

You can extract individual parts of the archive by entering names at the end of the command

Table of contents mode
Use t instead of the x flag

When unpacking, consider using the p option to preserve permissions.
Use this in extract mode to override your mask and get the exact permissions specified in the archive

The p option is the default when working ast the superuser.

2.18.3 Compressed ARchives (tar.gz)
gunzip file.tar.gz
tar xvf file.tar

to create it
tar first
then gzip

2.18.4 zcat

zcat file.tar.gz | tar xvf -

The zcat command is the same as gunzip -dc
-d option decompresses 
the -c option sends the result to standard output stream (in this case to tar)

You can use z as an option to automatically invoke gzip on the archive
This works both for extacting archive and creating one

E.g. 
tar ztvf file.tar.gz
will verify a compressed archive

tar.gz AKA .tgz


